File 1: The Solar System

The Solar System is a gravitationally bound system comprising the Sun and the objects that orbit it, either directly or indirectly. Of the objects that orbit the Sun directly, the largest are the eight planets, with the remainder being smaller objects such as dwarf planets and small Solar System bodies. The Solar System formed 4.6 billion years ago from the gravitational collapse of a giant interstellar molecular cloud. The vast majority of the system's mass is in the Sun, with most of the remaining mass contained in Jupiter.

The four inner system planets—Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars—are terrestrial planets, being primarily composed of rock and metal. The four outer system planets are giant planets, being substantially more massive than the terrestrials. The two largest, Jupiter and Saturn, are gas giants, being composed mainly of hydrogen and helium; the two outermost planets, Uranus and Neptune, are ice giants, being composed mostly of substances with relatively high melting points compared with hydrogen and helium, called volatiles, such as water, ammonia, and methane. All eight planets have nearly circular orbits that lie within a nearly flat disc called the ecliptic.

The Solar System also contains smaller objects. The asteroid belt, which lies between Mars and Jupiter, mainly contains objects composed, like the terrestrial planets, of rock and metal. Beyond Neptune's orbit lie the Kuiper belt and scattered disc, populations of trans-Neptunian objects composed mostly of ices. In the outermost regions of the Solar System are the heliopause and the Oort cloud, the latter of which is thought to be the source of long-period comets. Within these regions are several dozen to perhaps tens of thousands of objects that are large enough to have been rounded by their own gravity.

The Sun, the primary component of the Solar System, is a G-type main-sequence star that contains about 99.86% of the system's known mass and dominates it gravitationally. The Sun's four largest orbiting bodies, the gas giants, account for 99% of the remaining mass, with Jupiter and Saturn together comprising more than 90%. The remaining objects of the Solar System (including the four terrestrial planets, the dwarf planets, moons, and comets) together comprise less than 0.002% of the Solar System's total mass.

The Solar System's planets, including Earth, formed from the solar nebula, the disk-shaped mass of dust and gas left over from the Sun's formation. Through a process known as accretion, particles within the disk collided and stuck together to form ever-larger bodies, eventually leading to the formation of planets. Each planet began with a small, solid core, which then accreted material from the surrounding disk. The gas giants collected large amounts of gas from the solar nebula, while the terrestrial planets remained small and rocky.

Moons orbit many of the planets, with Earth having one large moon, while Jupiter and Saturn have more than 60 moons each. Some moons are large enough to sustain atmospheres and geological activity. For example, Jupiter's moon Io is the most volcanically active body in the Solar System, and Saturn's moon Titan has a thick atmosphere and lakes of liquid methane and ethane.

